# Python Data Structures
Easy explanation for Tuple, List, Set, and Dictionary in Python.

## Each Data Structure in Detail

### [Tuples](https://github.com/psumitcode/python-data-structures/blob/main/Tuples.md)

#

Note: This README file provides a quick summary of some important elements that are synonymous to most or all of the data structures. For details regarding each, please refer to the hyperlinks inside `Each Data Structure in Detail` section.

## Ordering and Indexing

| Functionality | List | Tuple | Set | Dictionary |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Ordered | ✓ | ✓ | ✕ | ✓¹ |
| Indexed | ✓ | ✓ | ✕ | ✕² |
| Duplicate Elements | ✓ | ✓ | ✕ | Keys Only |
| Mutable | ✓ | ✕ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Hashable | ✕ | ✓ | ✓ | Keys Only |

¹ Starting from Python 3.7, dictionaries are ordered by default due to their implementation. However, it is important to note that this is a language-specific detail, and relying on the order of dictionaries is not recommended in general. For guaranteed ordering, we should consider using `collections.OrderedDict`. For details, see [OrderedDict.md](https://github.com/psumitcode/python-data-structures/blob/main/OrderedDict.md).

² Dictionaries are not indexed, but we can access their values using keys.

#

## Note on hashing
In Python, a hashable element is an object that has a hash value that remains the same throughout its lifetime. A hash value is a fixed-size integer that is used to identify an object during lookup in a hash table. Immutable objects like numbers, strings, and tuples with immutable elements are hashable, while mutable objects like lists, sets, and dictionaries are not hashable.

### Hash value?
In Python, a hash value is a unique numerical representation of an object. This hash value is generated by applying a hash function to the object's contents. The hash function is designed to be fast and generate unique values for distinct objects.

Hash values are used for many purposes, such as indexing in dictionaries and sets. For an object to be stored in a set, it must be hashable, meaning it has a unique hash value that remains constant throughout its lifetime. Immutable objects in Python are hashable because their contents cannot be changed. For example, integers, strings, and tuples are hashable objects, while lists and dictionaries are not.

Here's an example:
```python
# Integers
print(hash(5))  # Output: 5
print(hash(-10))  # Output: -10

# Strings
print(hash('hello'))  # Output: 1102266484338832754
print(hash('world'))  # Output: -3810408550115311615

# Tuples
print(hash((1, 2, 3)))  # Output: 529344067295497451
print(hash(('apple', 'banana', 'cherry')))  # Output: 8600900286906204064
```
### Hashing complexity in a `set`
Sets only allow for hashable elements. Let's look at an example where this could be relevant.

```python
mercury = {True, "Mercury", [0,1,2]}
mercury

'''
Result:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)
Input In [106], in <cell line: 1>()
----> 1 mercury = {True, "Mercury", [0,1,2]}
      2 mercury

TypeError: unhashable type: 'list'
'''
```
This doesn't work because sets only allow for hashable elements, and lists are not hashable in Python. Hashable objects are immutable, and their hash value doesn't change during their lifetime. Since lists are mutable, their hash value can change, and therefore they are not hashable.

To create a set with the above elements, we could use a tuple instead of a list, since tuples are immutable and hashable. We could do something like:
```python
mercury = {True, "Mercury", (0, 1, 2)}
```
